Hello, everyone. Welcome to IDIS 651: Distribution Customer Experience course. Today, we are gonna focus on customer stratification. And as you look at the content we'll cover, it's going to be from your textbook, which you provided as part of the the MID iPad resource. The book will be called "Customer Stratification". And we are going to be going through Chapter 1 today, which is going to address on motivation and trends. So, we're gonna talk about what is customer stratification and the need for customer stratification. As a company, as an organization, why should you pursue customer stratification as one of the critical best practices? So, to begin with, we are going to start with what does the word stratification mean? We talk about segmentation, we talk about stratification grouping. So, there are different things we talk about, but I want to just kind of set the context in terms of what it means in this particular course, IDIS 651. So, stratification is the process of organizing your customers into distinct groups based on certain criteria, based on certain rules. And the reason we do that is so that we can prioritize your resources. The resources that we have in the organization is not unlimited. So, our time is limited, the money's limited. What we do as an organization is limited. So, we really have to prioritize the resources for the right customers. And while we do that, we will be able to help design the relevant customer experience. We cannot provide the same level of service, the same level of experience to all customers because every customer creates a different type of value. They compensate us differently in terms of margins or how much price they pay. So, the goal of stratification is to address two things. One is we are going to prioritize the resources. And the second thing is we're going to design the relevant customer experience for each distinct group. So, typically, this is how all customers are viewed. Every customer is treated the same because every customer is a good customer. Of course it's a good customer. We're not talking about not fulfilling any customer needs, but every customer is treated the same. But in reality, what we're trying to do is if you look at the customers, take them and segment them correctly into distinct groups, this is what you would look at, different segments. Four different segments and each segment adds their own value. One segment to the far right, the one in green, this particular segment is probably going to give you a large volume and high profitability. And then, as you go to the bottom left, you might have a customer that are low volume and low profitability. So, the goal is to understand what metric's going to define these customer segments. And above all, why as an organization do we need to pursue customer stratification? That's what we're gonna try to uncover in this section today. So, the benefits, some of the benefits of customer stratification. So, I want you to look at this in two aspects. Everything is value-based. We are going to focus on value. Because if you don't talk about value, then everything defaults to price. Yes, price could be a value, but let's leave price aside for a second. So, in terms of value creation, what we are going to look at is how can customer stratification help prioritize the resources that we have? So, on the left, if you look at it, so we look at inventory management. So, the first thing is if you have customer segmentation, and if you understand who those, the value-adding customers are, then it really helps you have the right inventory on hand. Make sure you have the right inventory and the right amount for those customers. The second thing it helps you do is if you have customer stratification, is to deploy your sales team more effectively. 'Cause you could have a particular customer that's growing significantly, but we don't have the right sales structure assigned to the customer. You may not have the top sales person assigned to the customer, or you may not have the right technical aspect of the sales person assigned to the customer. So, what it does is if you want to get a proper return on investment of your sales resources time, then customer stratification helps you do that. The third thing is sales force compensation. It's always been a challenge. So, if you look at an organization, they could have anywhere upwards of 10 or 50 salespeople and each of them operate differently. That's where the creativity comes in. But we all compensate our sales team. And based on the customer behavior, if we could incentivize appropriately to compensate from them more for the right customers and make the customers move in the right direction. So, this compensation is one key aspect that customer stratification will help with. Then, again, beyond that, how do you identify new growth opportunities? So, there are certain customers, say, I'll say in group one, all similar customers are in group one, but not all customers are buying the same products. So, that is an opportunity to look at the common items that most customers are buying in group one and try to see how we can get the other customers to buy it so it uncovers or unlocks new growth opportunities. And the last thing is having a focused effect on marketing. So, if you look at all these benefits, and as you look at the book, as you read through Chapter 1, you'll notice additional categories, but I kind of picked the top five here. And all of this go into value creation. We call this value creation because inventory, the sales team, the new growth opportunities in terms of what we stock, and marketing. These are all the resources or value that we provide for our customers. So, in other words, we are using all the resources to create value for our customers. Our customers can grow better with all the right investments we make. So, this is on the value creation side. But if we do all these correctly, then we also have to end up making money in the business. So, that's where we come to the next box, which talks about value capture. For everything we do for the customer, every resource we provide for the customer, how are we getting compensated? So, that goes down to pricing. How do you price each customer? And then, how do you negotiate with the customer? Because sometimes, the customer, they're gonna push back. And if you don't know what customer you're dealing with, if it's a core customer or a non-core customer, then sometimes we might end up giving a little more away than what we should have. So, having the right customer segmentation or customer stratification helps you understand that we are going to hold the line in terms of margin, that we are going to provide discounts, that we are going to add additional services, or that we are going to say, no, if you're going to do this, then we also want this portion of business. So, customer stratification enables you to have all these conversations more optimally and above all, more consistently. So, from here, what we are going to look at is we are going to look at some of the other trends in terms of why we are going to do customer stratification. So, we're gonna look at some of the other metrics. So, we're gonna look at, so one of the key things we talk about customer stratification is it is one of the foundational elements of your pricing decisions. And keep in mind that you're going to see the word value over and over. So, we are going to take an approach of value, and we're going to look at value creation, value capture. That's gonna be our conversation for most part throughout the course. Because without value, we cannot really address the relevant customer experience that we bring to the table. So, one of the key research that we did, and you will see that in Chapter 1 of the book as well, is to have the best foundation for pricing, there are five key things that truly matter. Of course you can look at multiple other variables, but five variables really drive home the point. The first thing is the customer value. Which customer buys from us or who buys from us? So, that's the first thing that's important when it comes to pricing. The second thing is what do we sell? What product are we selling? That's the second thing. The third one is risk. How often do we sell this item or how often do we sell this service? The fourth one is, what does it cost for us to buy this item from our supplier? So, it's a cost to us. On top of the cost is where we add the gross margin, and then that goes out as the price. So, in order to do the optimal pricing, we need to understand what the cost is. And the last thing is how much margins or how much profit have we been making in the past? Because if our pricing strategy as not optimal in the past, then we cannot expect to change the pricing strategy overnight. So, we have to take methodical steps. So, understanding what we've been doing in the past and what kind of margins we've been getting in the past is important. So, these are the five key drivers that are very fundamental to price. And as you notice, the number one variable here, right under customer value, is the customer rank. So, customer stratification that we talked about so far is very important to pricing, and it carries more than 50%, half the value in terms of what influences the price. So, in other words, if you're going to have an optimal pricing strategy at your company, then customer stratification should be the heart of your pricing strategy. That is why customer stratification is very critical. If you look at the other metrics, seller's item rank, that's about 20%. Yes, it is important, it's great to have item. Visibility is important as well. And all the other variables are fundamental for the pricing model. But if you have to pick, okay, I can't do all five, there's really one thing I want to do that will optimize my pricing model or margins, is customer rank. So, customer stratification is very important. Then, you look at pricing, profitability, and then using a value-driven approach. So, think about it in terms of what it means to you. Look at your pricing strategy in your organization. How do you price your customers? How do you price at a different category level, different market level? And see if your pricing strategy includes customer rank or customer stratification in some form or fashion. If not, then that's a great opportunity. So, use the slide to assess, look at your pricing process. Again, this is not an assignment, but more like an action item just to make sure that you're able to take this concept and apply it to your firm. So, look at this, look at how your pricing strategy is done. Go through each of the circles and see if you use customer rank, it's a checklist. If you use item rank, it's a checklist. And then, go through the five variables and see how many of these variables are actually part of your existing pricing process. That's one action item that you can take away from this slide. So, the next one is, as I said before, we are gonna focus on identifying the core customers. And the core customers usually account for a significant portion of your revenue. And typically what happens is, let's look at this example here. So, from a risk perspective, we have to segment a customers only then we can quantify risk. So, this company or this location for that particular company, they had about 300 customers. So, if I were to plot the revenue, if I were to add the revenue, so take the largest customer and then take the revenue, add the next largest customer, add their revenue. So, in other words, take all the customers, arrange them in decreasing order, and just keep adding the revenue from one customer to the mix. So, actually, as you go down from the top customer to the bottom customer, and you add up the last number, when you look at the revenue, it should be the total revenue of this location. So, on the horizontal, we have the number of customers. And then, on the vertical axis, we have the percentage of sales revenue. So, at the bottom, these are going to be a large customers. So, the first customer accounts for almost 10% of the revenue. And then, as you keep adding the customers and going up the line, look at where the dot hits the 70% mark. So, that circle that you see over here is the 70% mark. And then, if you look at, okay, I've got 300 customers. Of the 300 customers, I've got only 27 customers that account for 70% of my revenue. I mean, think about this, I've got 300 customers, active customers for this location. Of those 300 customers, only 27 customers, which is about 9% of the customers, account for 70% of the revenue. So, what should I do in this case? I should figure out a way to look at the opportunities for these 27 customers. Yes, the remaining customers, remaining 88, 90% of the customers, that is opportunity. But I need to really look at these 27 customers and see what I can do better or stratify these 27 customers to identify who are the core customers and who are the non-core customers. And your opportunity is going to lie with the non-core customers. So, that is why customer stratification is important, because if we don't do it, then each of the 300 customers are going to look the same to me. But if we do segmentation, now I can look at those 27 customers and then really separate them to see that there's a lot of value created and where there's a lot of value that's diluted. Because if the value is diluted, I need to increase my margins, reduce my cost-to-serve. If the value's added, I need to figure out a way to increase the value for those customers. So, if you've got 300 customers, it's probably a fairly straightforward exercise, but I know a lot of you in this class are going to have thousands of customers across multiple locations. So, customer certification becomes one of the vital best practice to help you separate the value and noise so you can really create that relevant customer experience for those distinct groups. Cost-to-serve, that's a very critical component because customer stratification is going to tell you how expensive certain customers are. So, let's look at an example here. So, this is one customer, their 12 months of sales is about half a million dollars, just to keep it straightforward, half a million dollars. And their gross margin is 25%. So, what it means is off the revenue of half a million dollars, 25% percent of that is my gross profit. So, in this case, it's $125,000 is my gross profit. And if I look at the customer performance, this customer places 125 orders a year, and every order has 10 items or 10 lines. And average order value. So, every time they place an order, the average value of the orders is about $4,000. And average accounts receivable, in other words, is every time I look at how much money is outstanding from the customer. So, I've invoice the customer, they bought up our product, I invoice the customer, and on an average at any given point of time, if I look at the dollar value, they've always, there's a pending balance of $75,000. So, it means that the customer takes a little longer to pay. So, now, if I were to look at the 25%, gross margin of 25%, this looks like a great healthy organization. I mean, this is a great customer, 25%. But now, what we're going to lose, we are going to look at the cost-to-serve. We have to take out the cost that we additionally incur to service this customer. That comes in various forms. So, if you look at the first column of the cost element, that's the order processing cost. Per order at $17, they placed $125 a year. So, the order processing costs is little over $2,000. And you can go through every single line item there. So, now at the bottom, if you look at the total cost-to-serve, it's almost $21,000. So, where does the $21,000 come from? It has to come out of the profit. It has to be taken out of the profit to give us a true reflection of moving from a gross profit to an actual or net profit. So, what looked like a great customer at 25% margin, when you start taking the cost out, at 25% on the far left is the 25%. But then, as you start adding the other cost and taking it out of the margin, that gross margin percentage went from 25 to 20.85. So, that is the cost-to-serve that's incurred for this customer. And for this customer, it's only about 4% from the gross margin to the credit, to the last line, to the bar. The difference is 4% of cost-to-serve from the margin. But if you look at certain customers, it'll be a steep decline. You could be, it could be costing about 10 or 15% off the margin itself to fulfill this customer's needs. So, taking this approach, the cost-to-serve, which is part of the customer stratification, is very important because if you look at this without cost-to-serve, it's a great customer. But then when you bring in the cost-to-serve, there is opportunity. What can we do to reduce the cost-to-serve? So, the next one is we could introduce to you to something called as the 7S Process Framework. So, what it tells you is, as a distributor, as a distributor, what are the different things I do functionally to service a customer? So, I get products from my suppliers and line up an area of resources and then use those resources to serve a customer and provide the right customer experience. So, there are seven different function groups we call 7S Process Framework. It starts with the supplier and then ends with the customer. So, in the middle is where a distributor is putting all the resources, making all the investments in terms of inventory, people, process, technology to get to the right customer service. If you look at the different functional areas, it starts from source. Sourcing has got everything to do with how we procure our products from suppliers. Stock talks about how much inventory we have and how do we manage that inventory. The third thing, store, talks about facilities. In order to house the inventory, they need buildings, they need locations. It talks about buildings and what goes into taking care of those buildings. Fourth one is sell. Sell talks about sales, pricing, marketing. Ship is how we get the products out to the customer. Strategic planning is if you have more than one location, how do you make sure that all these functions are happening efficiently in across all those locations? So, when you have more than one location or one branch, strategic planning is key. And usually, it's done every two to five years to assess each location, make sure you have the right inventory in each locations, right processes. So, it's a bigger initiative. But if you have two locations, then this might not be very relevant to you. But you've got more than two locations, multiple locations, then strategic planning is one of the other best practices, and it's part of the 7S Framework. And the last thing is support functions. This is where you're gonna talk about technology. What kind of IT team do you have? Gonna talk about human resources and then finance management. So, if you look at a distributor, anything that they do functionally would founder one of these 7S'. So, this is your framework, a process framework for a distribution company. And anything you do, you have to look at the lens of the 7S Process Framework. And why is it relevant to customer stratification? Because if you look at the 7S, sell is a critical function. And sell drives multiple activities. Within sell, if you blow up sell, you've got sales itself as a function, you've got marketing, which goes under the sell process group. And then, you've also got pricing. And customer stratification is one of the core best practices in sell. And that is why if you look at the 7S process group, the sell process group is called as the Super S Process Group. Because anything that you do to improve here, including customer stratification, is going to improve your net profit across the organization with more than 5 to 10 percentage points, by 5 to 10 percentage points. Distributors typically on an average, run about four to six percentage points in terms of net profit. So, this is, you make a revenue of say, 1 million, at the end, 4 to 6% is the actual profit or operating profit or net profit, however you want to call it. But customer stratification alone can almost double the net profit. It can get you from 8 to almost 12%. So, that is how important customer stratification is to any distribution organization. So, the last thing I want you to keep in mind is, as we look at customer stratification, you also want to look at what are my goals? What do I want to do with this? And organizations, if you look at sales, every organization has a sales goal. At the beginning of the year, we know, okay, this year, this is our forecast, this is our budget, this is what we want to hit this end of the year. So, we are at the beginning of 2026. So, if you look at 2025, you're gonna say, okay, last year, I'm going to increase my sales by 10% or 12% or 15%, depending on what your growth strategy is. But often, companies do not set a similar growth strategy or at least a pricing strategy. They don't start with pricing, saying that I'm going to improve my margin by five percentage points. I'm going to get my margin from 25% to 27%. It is usually an afterthought. But the reason they're not able to set the goals is a lack of a distinct stratification framework. Now, if you know how my customers are distributed, who my core customers and non-core customers are, then I can set a realistic goal in terms of what my margin expectations could be for the core and non-core customers. So, with that said, I'm going to introduce you to a six-step layered pricing framework. And again, this is going to be throughout. I mean, as we go through each chapter and as you get into the group projects, we are going to be, we are gonna start levering things a lot more. So, the first step is goals. We have to set with a margin goal. When I say a goal, you're not gonna say, okay, I'm gonna improve my margin. That's not a goal. It has to be very specific and it has to be more objective. So, look at what your margin is, look at the average, and figure out a way to set the margin goal. So, in this example, this company said, we are going to improve our margin to 22.5%. That's the goal. That's as realistic (indistinct) As we go onto Chapter 2 and Chapter 3, what we're going to do is we're going, I'm gonna provide a goal-setting template. So, that will help you use your numbers, put in your numbers, and then get an estimate of what your realistic goal could be. So, we're gonna use that. That's gonna be part of your assignment for the next couple of weeks. But the first thing is to set a realistic estimate of what your margin goal is. From there, you go to determine what are the things or what are the drivers that will help me get to the margin goal. But here, we are going to look at purely a data-driven exercise. We want to leverage data as much as possible. It means data should be available, it should be reliable, and it should be quantifiable. In other words, nobody, anybody in the organization looking at the data should have the same takeaway. If it saves this X amount of dollars, it is X amount of dollars no matter who looks at it. So, it is going to be purely data-driven and no subjectivity at this point. We'll add the creativity later. The third thing is, once you do that, we have to analyze that. So, we're going to look at how do we group our customers? How do we group our products? How do we group our suppliers? And as I said before, stratification's the heart of pricing. And that's when we see defined management groups. This is where customer stratification comes in. So, once you run all the numbers, do the analysis, and get the customer segmentation, the fourth step comes to rules. Now, I know, if it's a core customer, what kind of margin expectations can I set? What should be my goal at the core customer level? And then, if you look at the non-core customers, I can probably set a more aggressive goal because they're low volume customers and they're doing business with us for a reason. So, how do we adjust that and improve our pricing itself? And the next step is then you establish control. All the four steps. The first four steps are purely based on data. The fifth step is then our sales team. And all of us, everybody who influences pricing with the customer looks at this and says, okay, this is what the data tells us. Now, I'm going to make adjustments based on what's happening in the marketplace. So, rather than having somebody do all the five steps, which each of us could do it differently. So, having customer stratification allows you to do those four steps little more consistently, more proactively. Then, you bring the intelligence, the creativity of the sales team, the creativity of the technical team, the marketing team, to deliver the final price to the customer. So, as you look at the six steps, what we did is we kind of blended in the science portion of the pricing equation, which includes customer stratification, all the segmentation approach, and then you bring in the art. So, as you look at the course, you are going to see it's going to be more like a pricing, which is going to be a science-assisted art. So, we are gonna use data as much as possible to establish consistency. And you will notice we have a lot of these activities between weeks to help you take this information and not wait till the completion of course to put into practice. But use your data as you move from week one to week two to start getting an insight of where opportunities exist and work on them as you learn all the best practices. And hopefully by the end of the semester, you would already see some improvement in margins, sales, reduction in cost-to-serve, and more, more, more other benefits that come out of all the implementation things that you take care of during the course. So, to summarize, again, this is not an assignment. It's more like a food for thought, an action item. What we want you to do is go through Chapter 1, Chapter 1 of the "Customer Stratification" book. Look at, there are some examples there. Look at it and see how it applies to your organization. And as you look at it, I want to look at it to see why should you pursue customer stratification? What is the motivation? If you go into customer stratification, you should not do it just because it's a best practice. I want you to take another look to see why is customer stratification important to us? What am I going to do with it once I have the results? And then, you can decide, okay, how am I going to do customer stratification? So, think about this as you look at the content, as you go from week one to the next week, look at how these things come to play 